AI AND LLM BASICS

A beginner-friendly study note for understanding Artificial
Intelligence, Large Language Models, and LLM application development.

1. WHAT IS AI?

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the field of building computer systems
that can perform tasks that normally require human-like intelligence.

Examples include: - Understanding language - Recognizing images - Making
predictions - Finding patterns in data - Recommending products -
Planning or making decisions - Generating text, images, audio, or code

AI is a broad field. Machine learning is one approach to AI, and deep
learning is a type of machine learning. Modern LLMs are deep-learning
systems.

A simple hierarchy is:

AI | +– Machine Learning | +– Deep Learning | +– Transformer models | +–
Many modern LLMs

2. WHAT IS AN LLM?

LLM stands for Large Language Model.

An LLM is a machine-learning model trained on large amounts of data so
that it can process and generate language. Modern generative LLMs
commonly generate text by predicting the next token based on the tokens
that came before it.

For example:

Input: “The capital of France is”

The model calculates probabilities for possible next tokens. “Paris” may
receive a high probability.

The model then generates a token and continues the process.

Important point: An LLM does not work like a normal database containing
an answer for every question. It has learned statistical patterns and
representations from its training process and generates an answer from
those learned patterns and the information available in its current
context.

3. WHAT IS LLM MODEL SIZE?

“Model size” usually refers to the number of trainable parameters in a
model.

Examples: - 1 billion parameters = 1B model - 7 billion parameters = 7B
model - 70 billion parameters = 70B model

A larger parameter count generally means a larger model, but parameter
count alone does not determine overall quality.

Model size also affects: - Memory required to load the model - Storage
required for model weights - Compute required for training and
inference - Potential capability

A smaller model can sometimes perform better than a larger model on a
particular task, depending on architecture, training data, training
methods, and task.

4. WHAT IS A TOKEN AND HOW DOES TOKENIZATION WORK?

A token is a piece of text that an LLM processes.

A token may be: - A whole word - Part of a word - Punctuation - A
number - A special symbol

For example, the sentence:

“I love Python.”

might be split into tokens roughly similar to:

“I” | ” love” | ” Python” | “.”

The exact tokenization depends on the model’s tokenizer.

Tokenization normally works like this:

Text | v Tokenizer | v Token IDs (numbers) | v LLM

The model does not directly process ordinary text characters. The
tokenizer converts text into token IDs, which are numerical
representations used by the neural network.

Token counts matter because APIs and models commonly measure input and
output capacity in tokens, not simply characters or words.

5. WHAT ARE PARAMETERS IN AN LLM?

Parameters are numerical values learned during model training.

They are often called the model’s weights.

During training, the model processes examples and adjusts these values
so that its predictions improve.

A simplified view is:

Training data | v Model | v Prediction | v Compare with expected result
| v Adjust parameters | +—-> Repeat many times

If a model has 7 billion parameters, it has approximately 7 billion
learned numerical values.

HOW DO PARAMETERS RELATE TO MODEL SIZE?

More parameters usually means a larger model.

For example:

7B model -> approximately 7 billion parameters 70B model ->
approximately 70 billion parameters

The parameter count also influences memory requirements. For example, if
parameters are stored using 16-bit values, the raw weights require
approximately:

Number of parameters x 2 bytes

So 7 billion parameters would require roughly 14 GB just for the raw
weights, before additional memory for runtime operations, caches, and
other components.

Quantization can reduce the memory required by representing weights with
fewer bits.

6. WHAT IS FINE-TUNING?

Fine-tuning means taking an already trained model and continuing
training on a smaller, task-specific dataset.

For example, imagine a general-purpose LLM that understands programming.

You could fine-tune it using examples such as:

Question -> Correct company-specific response

or:

Input -> Desired output

The model’s parameters are adjusted so that it becomes better at the
patterns represented by the fine-tuning data.

Fine-tuning can be useful for: - Consistent output formats - Specialized
behavior - Specific writing styles - Classification tasks -
Domain-specific patterns - Following particular examples more reliably

Fine-tuning is not normally the first solution for giving an LLM access
to changing company information. For current/private information, RAG or
tool access may be more appropriate.

7. WHAT IS PROMPT ENGINEERING?

Prompt engineering is the practice of designing the instructions and
input given to an LLM so that it produces a useful result.

A weak prompt might be:

“Explain SQL.”

A more specific prompt could be:

“Explain SQL to a beginner who knows Python. Give a simple definition,
three examples, and one SQLite example.”

The second prompt gives the model: - Role/audience - Task - Level of
detail - Required format - Examples or constraints

Common prompt-engineering techniques include: - Clearly state the task -
Provide relevant context - Specify the output format - Give examples -
Define constraints - Ask the model to use supplied information

PROMPT ENGINEERING VS FINE-TUNING

Prompt engineering: - Changes the input/instructions. - Does not
normally change the model’s learned weights. - Usually quick and
inexpensive to experiment with. - Good for controlling a model’s
response for a particular request.

Fine-tuning: - Uses additional training data. - Changes model
parameters/weights. - Requires a training process and suitable
dataset. - Can make behavior more consistent for a specialized task.

Simple analogy:

Prompt engineering = give an employee better instructions for each task.

Fine-tuning = give the employee additional training so the behavior
becomes learned.

8. WHAT ARE EMBEDDINGS AND WHY ARE THEY IMPORTANT?

An embedding is a numerical representation of information, such as text.

A piece of text is converted into a vector of numbers:

“How do I reset my password?” | v [0.12, -0.43, 0.77, …]

Texts with similar meaning tend to have embeddings that are closer
together in vector space, depending on the embedding model.

Embeddings are important for: - Semantic search - Document retrieval -
Recommendation systems - Similarity matching - RAG systems - Finding
related documents

For example, a keyword search may treat:

“How can I change my password?”

and

“I forgot my login password”

as quite different strings.

An embedding-based search can represent their meaning and retrieve
related information.

A common RAG flow is:

Documents | v Split into chunks | v Create embeddings | v Store vectors
| User question | v Create question embedding | v Find similar document
chunks | v Send retrieved context to LLM | v Generate answer

9. WHAT IS THE CONTEXT WINDOW?

The context window is the amount of token-based information a model can
consider as part of a request and its conversation/context, subject to
the specific model’s limits.

Context can include: - System instructions - User questions - Previous
conversation - Retrieved documents - Code - Tool results - Other input
supplied to the model

A simplified view is:

+---------------------------------------+
|             Context Window            |
|                                       |
| Instructions Conversation Source      |
| documents Code User question          |
+---------------------------------------+

                 |
                 v
               LLM
                 |
                 v
              Answer

WHY DOES IT MATTER IN CODING?

When working with code, you may need to provide: - Multiple source
files - Database schemas - Error messages - Configuration - API
definitions - Existing implementation - Tests

If the relevant information does not fit into the model’s usable
context, some information may need to be removed, summarized, retrieved,
or supplied in smaller pieces.

A larger context window can make it easier to work with large codebases
or documents, but simply having a larger context window does not
guarantee better results. Relevant context still needs to be selected
and organized well.

10. WHAT ARE LLM HALLUCINATIONS?

An LLM hallucination is an answer that contains information that is
incorrect, unsupported, or invented while being presented as if it were
a valid answer.

Examples: - Inventing a library function that does not exist - Giving a
nonexistent citation - Making up a database column - Claiming a
historical event happened when it did not - Producing incorrect code
that looks plausible

Why can this happen?

An LLM is designed to generate likely sequences of tokens. It is not
automatically a truth database or guaranteed fact-checker.

Ways to reduce hallucinations include: - Give reliable source material -
Use RAG - Use tools and APIs to obtain current information - Ask for
citations where appropriate - Validate generated code - Test
calculations and queries - Ask the model to distinguish known
information from assumptions - Use evaluation and human review for
important applications

11. LIMITATIONS OF LLMs

Important limitations include:

1.  Incorrect information The model can generate false or outdated
    information.

2.  Knowledge cutoff or stale information A model may not know events or
    data after its training period unless external information is
    supplied.

3.  Hallucinations It can produce plausible but incorrect information.

4.  Context limitations There is a maximum amount of context the model
    can process.

5.  Reasoning mistakes LLMs can make errors in mathematics, logic, code,
    or multi-step tasks.

6.  Dependence on input quality Poor or ambiguous instructions can
    produce poor results.

7.  Security risks LLM applications can be exposed to risks such as
    prompt injection, data leakage, and unsafe tool use.

8.  Cost and latency Larger models and large contexts can require more
    computing resources and can increase response time or API cost.

9.  No automatic guarantee of truth A fluent response should not
    automatically be treated as verified information.

10. HOW CAN AN LLM INTERACT WITH COMPUTERS?

An LLM by itself primarily processes inputs and generates outputs. To
interact with external systems, an application can connect the model to
tools.

For example:

User | v LLM | +—-> Calculator tool | +—-> SQL database | +—-> REST API
| +—-> File system | +—-> Web search | +—-> Business application | v
Tool result | v LLM | v Final response

A tool can be an ordinary program function.

For example:

def get_customer(customer_id): # Query database return customer_data

The application can make this function available to the LLM through an
appropriate tool/function-calling interface.

The LLM can decide that a tool is needed, provide the required
arguments, and the application executes the tool. The result is then
returned to the LLM.

This is an important pattern for AI agents and AI-assisted software.

13. WHAT IS RAG?

RAG stands for Retrieval-Augmented Generation.

RAG allows an LLM application to retrieve relevant information from an
external knowledge source and provide that information to the LLM before
generating an answer.

Typical RAG flow:

1.  Collect documents
2.  Split documents into chunks
3.  Create embeddings
4.  Store the embeddings in a vector store
5.  User asks a question
6.  Convert the question into an embedding
7.  Retrieve relevant chunks
8.  Put the retrieved chunks into the LLM context
9.  Generate an answer

Example:

Company PDF documents | v RAG system | User: “What is our warehouse
process?” | v Relevant company documents | v LLM | v Answer based on
retrieved information

RAG is particularly useful when information is: - Private - Frequently
changing - Too large to put into a prompt manually - Stored in company
documents or databases

RAG does not retrain the LLM. It supplies external information at query
time.

14. THREE FRAMEWORKS TO START CODING WITH LLMs

There are many tools and frameworks. Three useful choices for learning
are:

A. HUGGING FACE TRANSFORMERS

Hugging Face Transformers is a major Python library for working directly
with pretrained transformer models. It supports model loading,
inference, tokenization, and training/fine-tuning workflows.

It is useful when you want to understand: - Models - Tokenizers - Local
LLMs - Inference - Fine-tuning - Model configuration

Example:

from transformers import pipeline

pipe = pipeline(“text-generation”, model=“…”) result = pipe(“Explain SQL
simply.”)

Transformers is a good foundation for understanding what is happening
closer to the model level.

B. LANGCHAIN

LangChain is an application-development framework for composing LLMs
with prompts, tools, integrations, agents, retrievers, and other
components.

It is useful when building: - Chatbots - Tool-using applications -
Agents - RAG applications - Multi-step LLM workflows

The current LangChain ecosystem also includes LangGraph for stateful,
long-running agent workflows and LangSmith for debugging, testing, and
monitoring.

C. LLAMAINDEX

LlamaIndex focuses strongly on connecting LLMs with external data.

It is particularly useful for: - RAG - Document processing - Data
indexing - Retrieval - Question answering over documents - Agents that
work with data

For example, you can load company documents, create an index, retrieve
relevant information, and provide that information to an LLM.

HOW TO CHOOSE

If your goal is to understand the model itself: Start with Hugging Face
Transformers.

If your goal is to build general LLM applications and agents: Learn
LangChain.

If your goal is mainly RAG and working with documents/company data:
Learn LlamaIndex.

These tools can also be used together. They are not mutually exclusive.

15. SIMPLE LLM LEARNING PATH

A practical learning sequence is:

Step 1: Understand Python.

Step 2: Understand AI, machine learning, deep learning, and neural
networks.

Step 3: Learn: - Tokens - Tokenization - Embeddings - Parameters - Model
size - Context windows

Step 4: Use an existing LLM through an API.

Step 5: Learn prompt engineering.

Step 6: Build a simple chatbot.

Step 7: Learn embeddings and vector search.

Step 8: Build a small RAG application using your own documents.

Step 9: Learn tool/function calling so the LLM can interact with APIs,
databases, and programs.

Step 10: Learn agents and workflows.

Step 11: Learn fine-tuning when you have a clear reason and suitable
training data.

16. KEY DIFFERENCES AT A GLANCE

AI: The broad field of making computers perform intelligent tasks.

LLM: A large language model that processes and generates language.

Token: A piece of text represented as a token ID for the model.

Parameter: A learned numerical value inside the model.

Model size: Often expressed by the number of parameters, such as 7B or
70B.

Prompt engineering: Improving instructions/input to control the model’s
response.

Fine-tuning: Additional training that changes model parameters.

Embedding: A numerical vector representation used to capture useful
relationships or semantic similarity.

Context window: The token-based context available to the model for a
request.

Hallucination: Incorrect or unsupported content generated by an LLM.

RAG: Retrieving external information and giving it to the LLM as
context.

Tool calling: Connecting the LLM application to external functions,
APIs, databases, or other tools.

17. ONE BIG PICTURE

                    AI
                     |
          +----------+----------+
          |                     |
     Machine Learning      Other AI methods
          |
     Deep Learning
          |
     Transformer Models
          |
         LLM
          |
    +-----+-----+----------------+
    |           |                |

Prompt RAG Tool Calling Engineering | | | Embeddings APIs | Documents
SQL | Vector DB Files | | +————+————-+ | LLM Application | v User

SUMMARY

The most important idea is that an LLM is a trained model that works
with tokens and learned parameters. Prompt engineering controls how we
ask the model to perform a task. Embeddings help applications search and
compare information by meaning. RAG supplies relevant external
information without retraining the model. Tool calling allows an LLM
application to interact with databases, APIs, files, and other computer
systems. Fine-tuning changes the model through additional training when
specialized behavior is required.

For a beginner learning to build LLM applications in Python, a useful
progression is: Python -> LLM API -> Prompt Engineering -> Embeddings ->
RAG -> Tool Calling -> Agents -> Fine-tuning.
